{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf2867
\cocoatextscaling0\cocoaplatform0{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;\f1\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPS-BoldMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red230\green0\blue14;\red21\green21\blue21;\red177\green130\blue74;
\red170\green132\blue81;\red53\green53\blue53;\red255\green255\blue255;}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;\cssrgb\c93213\c13483\c4656;\cssrgb\c10980\c10980\c10980;\cspthree\c72549\c58824\c39216;
\cssrgb\c72549\c58824\c39216;\cssrgb\c27059\c27059\c27059;\cssrgb\c100000\c100000\c100000;}
\margl1440\margr1440
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs32 \cf2 \up0 \nosupersub \ulnone Understanding the Language of Taal and Kathak\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf3 \
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf2 Taal:\cf3  \cf4 A rhythmic cycle defined by a fixed number of beats. Example: Teentaal consists of 16 beats.\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf3 \
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf2 Matra:\cf5  A single beat, serving as the unit to measure the duration of a taal.\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf3 \
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf2 Avartan: \cf4 One complete cycle of a taal.\
\
\cf2 Sam:\cf4  The first beat of a taal, often emphasized as the starting point for compositions.\
\
\cf2 Vibhag:\cf4  Sections or divisions of a taal. Example: Teentaal has 4 vibhags.\
\
\cf2 Tali: \cf4 A clap used to indicate an accented beat in a taal.\
\
\cf2 Khali: \cf4 An empty or unaccented beat within a taal, providing contrast to the tali.\
\
\cf2 Tabla: \cf4 A pair of hand-played percussion drums frequently used as accompaniment in Kathak performances.\
\
\cf2 Bol: \cf4 A syllable or sound used to represent a specific stroke on the tabla or a rhythmic idea.\
\
\cf2 Theka: \cf4 The specific pattern of bols played on the tabla to establish a taal. Example: Teentaal theka is as below. \
\
DHA DHIN DHIN DHA\
DHA DHIN DHIN DHA\
DHA TIN TIN TA\
TA DHIN DHIN DHA\
\
\cf2 Laya: \cf4 The tempo or speed of a composition, classified as Vilambit (slow), Madhya (medium), and Drut (fast).\
\
\cf2 Tatkar: \cf4 Basic footwork and foundation of Kathak, where rhythmic syllables are produced through stamping in accordance with the taal.\
\
\cf2 Parhant: \cf4 The recitation of bols that correspond to the beats of a composition, often used for practice or teaching.\
\
\cf2 Tora: \cf4 A sequence of bols or syllables that begins and ends on the sam.\
\
\cf2 Tukra: \cf4 A short composition completed within 1 to 3 avartans.\
\
\cf2 Tihai:\cf4  A rhythmic pattern repeated three times, often concluding on the sam.\
\
\cf2 Lari: \cf4 A chain of footwork patterns that typically ends with a tihai.\
\
\cf2 Chakkar / Pheri / Bhramari : \cf4 It refers to controlled pirouettes/turns executed with balance, rhythm, and grace.\
\
\cf2 Chakradar: \cf4 A structure in which a tihai, toda, or paran is repeated three times.\
\
 \cf2 Amad: \cf4 The formal entrance on stage. A tukra performed to greet the audience with a Namaste is called the amad, usually comprising the bols ta, thei, tat. Usually set in Vilambit Laya. \
\
\cf2 Paran:\cf4  Rhythmic bols or phrases derived from the pakhawaj, performed in sync with the taal, often concluding with a tihai.\
\
\cf2 Gat\cf4  :  Gat is derived from 'gati'  or walk or movements. It is a stylized, graceful movement in Kathak dance that emphasizes a specific gait or posture to depict daily life scenes, characters, or narratives. It is characterized by elegant body postures, subtle facial expressions (abhinaya).\
\
\
\cf2 Bhatkhande Notation\cf4  : It is a systematic method of writing and preserving Indian classical music and dance compositions, developed by Pandit Vishnu Narayan Bhatkhande.\
\
In Kathak, Bhatkhande notation is used to record and teach bols, tukras, parans, and gats, helping students understand sam, khali, vibhags, and rhythmic symmetry.\
\
The system uses special symbols for rhythmic cycles, with 'X' representing the sam (first beat), '0' for khaali (empty), and numbers (2, 3, 4) for other taalis (beats).\
\
Example : Teentaal Theka \
\
Dha  Dhin  Dhin  Dha |  Dha  Dhin  Dhin  Dha | \
X                                  2    \
\
Dha  Tin  Tin  Ta |  Ta  Dhin  Dhin  Dha  | |\
0                         3       \
\
\
\cf2 Major Taals Used in Kathak\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf4 \
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf2 Teentaal\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf4 	Total Matras: 16\
	Vibhag (Sections): 4 (4 + 4 + 4 + 4)\
	Tali: 1st, 5th, and 13th matra\
	Khali: 9th matra\
	Sam: 1st matra\
	Description:\
\pard\pardeftab720\qj\partightenfactor0
\cf4 Teentaal is the most widely used taal in Kathak. It is balanced and symmetrical, making it ideal for footwork, tihais, and complex rhythmic compositions.\
Theka : \
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf4 Dha  Dhin  Dhin  Dha |  Dha  Dhin  Dhin  Dha | \
X                                  2    \
\
Dha  Tin  Tin  Ta |  Ta  Dhin  Dhin  Dha  | |\
0                         3       \
\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf2 Jhaptaal\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf4 	Total Matras: 10\
	Vibhag (Sections): 4 (2 + 3 + 2 + 3)\
	Tali: 1st, 3rd, and 8th matra\
	Khali: 6th matra\
	Sam: 1st matra\
	Description:\
\pard\pardeftab720\qj\partightenfactor0
\cf4 Jhaptaal has an uneven structure that creates rhythmic variety and is often used for expressive and layakari-based compositions.\
Theka :\
Dhi   Na  |  Dhi  Dhi  Na |\
X                2\
\
Ti  Na  | Dhi  Dhi  Na  | |\
0             3\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf4 \
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf2 Dadra Taal\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf4 	Total Matras: 6\
	Vibhag (Sections): 2 (3 + 3)\
	Tali: 1st and 4th matra\
	Khali: None\
	Sam: 1st matra\
	Description:\
\pard\pardeftab720\qj\partightenfactor0
\cf4 Dadra is a light, lilting taal commonly used for thumri and expressive pieces in Kathak.\
Theka :\
Dha  Dhin  Na |  Dha  Tu  Na | |\
X                         0\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf4 \
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf2 Keherwa Taal\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf4 	Total Matras: 8\
	Vibhag (Sections): 2 (4 + 4)\
	Tali: 1st and 5th matra\
	Khali: None\
	Sam: 1st matra\
	Description:\
\pard\pardeftab720\qj\partightenfactor0
\cf4 Keherwa is a popular, folk-influenced taal, frequently used in lighter compositions and rhythmic improvisations.\
Theka :\
Dha  Ge  Na  Tin  |  Na  Ka  Dhi   Na  | |\
X                              0\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf4 \
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf2 Ektaal\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf4 	Total Matras: 12\
	Vibhag (Sections): 6 (2 + 2 + 2 + 2 + 2 + 2)\
	Tali: 1st, 5th, and 9th matra\
	Khali: 3rd and 7th matra\
	Sam: 1st matra\
	Description:\
\pard\pardeftab720\qj\partightenfactor0
\cf4 Ektaal is known for its structured and disciplined format and is often used for advanced rhythmic exploration in Kathak.\
Theka :\
Dhin  Dhin |  Dhage  Tirkit  | Tu Na  | Kat  Ta | \
X                   0                      2           0\
\
\
Dhage  Tirkit  |  Dhi  Na  ||\
3                        4\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf4 \
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf2 Dhamar Taal\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf4 	Total Matras: 14\
	Vibhag (Sections): 4 (5 + 2 + 3 + 4)\
	Tali: 1st, 6th, and 11th matra\
	Khali: 8th matra\
	Sam: 1st matra\
        Description:\
\pard\pardeftab720\qj\partightenfactor0
\cf4 Dhamar is traditionally associated with devotional and Holi-related compositions and has a strong, masculine rhythmic character.\
Theka : \
Ka  Dhi  Ta  Dhi  Ta |  Dha  S |  Ga  Di  Na  |  Di  Na  Ta  S ||\
X.                                2            0                     3\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf4 \
\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf2 Name of all the Indian Classical Dance Styles and the States of Origin\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf4 \
Kathak - Uttar Pradesh (and Rajasthan)\
Bharata Natyam - Tamil Nadu\
Kuchipudi - Andhra Pradesh\
Kathakali - Kerala\
Mohini Attaam - Kerala\
Odissi - Orissa\
Manipuri - Manipur\
Sastriya - Assam\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf2 What is Kathak?\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf4 \
\pard\pardeftab720\qj\partightenfactor0
\cf4 Kathak is a classical dance form of North India. The term Kathak is derived from the Sanskrit word \'93Katha\'94, meaning story. Performers known as Kathakars were traditional storytellers who narrated mythological tales through expressive movement, music, and rhythm, often performing in temples with deep devotion and spiritual fervor. Their storytelling through dance and devotion gradually evolved into the classical form known today as Kathak.\
\
Kathak is broadly divided into Nritta, the pure and technical aspect of dance focusing on rhythm and footwork, and Abhinaya (Natya), the expressive and storytelling aspect that conveys emotions and narratives. Together, these elements allow Kathak to depict life in its entirety, reflecting the three fundamental phases of existence\'97creation, preservation, and destruction.\
\
The dance form is rooted in natural movements and is not restricted to codified hand gestures alone. Its postures are lifelike rather than sculptural, and its abhinaya is characterized by subtlety, grace, and realism. Kathak is also distinguished among Indian classical dances for its frequent and skillful use of pirouettes (chakkars), which form a defining visual and technical feature of the style.\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf4 \
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf2 Brief History of Kathak\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf4 \
Kathak originated as a temple-based storytelling tradition in North India, performed by Kathakars who narrated religious and mythological stories through movement and expression. Over time, the dance form transitioned into the royal courts of North India, especially during the Mughal period, where it absorbed Persian influences in music, costume, and aesthetics.\
\
Under royal patronage, Kathak evolved into a sophisticated classical art form, giving rise to distinct gharanas such as Lucknow, Jaipur, Banaras, and Raigarh. Despite historical challenges during the colonial period, Kathak survived and flourished in the modern era through dedicated gurus and performers.\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa297\partightenfactor0

\f1\b\fs48 \cf6 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sa297\partightenfactor0

\f0\b0\fs32 \cf2 Difference between Nritta, Nritya, and Natya\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf4 Nritta refers to pure dance. It emphasizes rhythm, footwork, body movements, and technical precision without expressing any specific emotion or story. Tatkar, tihais, tukras, and chakkars are examples of nritta in Kathak.\
\
Nritya is expressive dance where emotions (bhava) are conveyed through movement, facial expressions, and gestures. It combines rhythmic movement with abhinaya, allowing the dancer to interpret poetry, lyrics, or moods.\
\
Natya represents dramatic storytelling. It involves elaborate narrative expression, character portrayal, and enactment of stories, often drawn from mythology or literature. In Kathak, natya is seen in detailed episodes from the lives of Krishna, Radha, and other mythological figures.\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf4 \
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa297\partightenfactor0
\cf2 Definition of Nazakat\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf4 Nazakat refers to delicacy, refinement, and grace in movement and expression. It is a hallmark of Kathak, particularly associated with the Lucknow Gharana. Nazakat is visible in soft footwork, gentle transitions, fluid hand movements, and subtle facial expressions. It reflects an aesthetic of elegance and restraint, where emotions are suggested rather than overtly displayed.\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf2 Defintion of\cf4  \cf2 Kasak \'96 Masak\cf4 \
\
Kasak and Masak are subtle expressive techniques used in Kathak abhinaya.\
Kasak denotes a sudden emotional pull or inner stirring, often portraying longing, anticipation, or emotional tension. It is reflected through sharp yet controlled movements of the eyes, eyebrows, or torso.\
\
Masak represents playfulness, gentle teasing, or affectionate charm. It is expressed through soft smiles, coy glances, and light body movements.\
Together, kasak\'96masak enrich Kathak\'92s expressive vocabulary, allowing nuanced emotional storytelling with minimal movement.\
\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa297\partightenfactor0
\cf2 Difference between Samapadi and Asamapadi Taal :\'a0\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf4 In Indian classical rhythm, taals are classified based on the symmetry of their vibhag (sections). This classification helps dancers and musicians understand the rhythmic structure more clearly.\uc0\u8232 \u8232 Samapadi Taal\u8232 \u8232 Definition:\u8232 A Samapadi taal is one in which all the vibhags are equal in length, meaning each section contains the same number of matras.\u8232 \u8232 Key Features:\
Symmetrical and balanced structure\
Easy to follow and aesthetically even\
Widely used for teaching, practice, and performance\
\
Example:\
    Teentaal :  \
                     Total Matras: 16\
     Vibhag: 4 + 4 + 4 + 4\
     All sections are equal\
Other examples include Ektaal (2+2+2+2+2+2) and Chautaal (4+4+4+4).\
\uc0\u8232 Asamapadi Taal\
\uc0\u8232 Definition:\u8232 An Asamapadi taal is one in which the vibhags are unequal in length, meaning the sections contain different numbers of matras.\
\uc0\u8232 Key Features:\
Asymmetrical rhythmic structure\
Creates rhythmic tension and variety\
Requires greater rhythmic awareness and layakari\
\
Example:\
Jhaptaal :\
Total Matras: 10\
Vibhag: 2 + 3 + 2 + 3\
Sections are unequal\
Other examples include Rupak Taal (3+2+2) and Dhamar Taal (5+2+3+4).\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa297\partightenfactor0
\cf2 Definition of Gat Bhav, Gat Nikas, Gat Palta:\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf4 \
\
\
Gat Bhav \
\
Gat Bhav is a composed, fixed dance sequence set to a specific taal and laya, mainly used to depict a character, situation, or bhava.\
The main features are : \
Has a defined choreography\
Strong abhinaya and movement coordination\
Often narrative (Radha, Krishna, nayika, daily-life scenes)\
Ends with a clear sam / tihai\
Performed repeatedly in the same structure\
\
Example: Kaliya Daman Gat, Matki Gat, Radha-Krishna Gat\
\
Gat Nikas\
\
Gat Nikas means the manner or style of entering, developing, and concluding a gat. The main features are :\
	Focuses on graceful transitions\
	Emphasizes body alignment, nazakat, and flow\
	Less about story, more about presentation and elegance\
	Highlights how a dancer moves into and out of movements\
	Often slow to madhya laya\
\
Think of it as the aesthetic unfolding of a gat, not the gat itself.\
\
Gat Palta \
\
Gat Palta in Kathak is a foundational, stylistic turn (often an ardha-brahmari or half-spin) used to gracefully transition between scenes, characters, or rhythmic patterns. It acts as a connecting movement in Gat Nikas and Gat Bhav, allowing the dancer to change direction, character, or location.\uc0\u8232 \u8232 \cf2 Difference between Jati and Yati in Taal (with Examples)\uc0\u8232 \cf4 \uc0\u8232 In Indian classical rhythm, Jati and Yati are two important concepts that describe how beats are grouped and how rhythmic patterns progress within a taal or composition. Though they sound similar, they serve different rhythmic purposes.\
\uc0\u8232 Jati\u8232 \u8232     Definition:\
Jati refers to the number of matras (beats) grouped together within a vibhag or rhythmic unit. It defines the quantitative structure of the rhythm.\uc0\u8232 \
   Types of Jati (common examples):\
Chatusra Jati: Group of 4 beats\
Tisra Jati: Group of 3 beats\
Khanda Jati: Group of 5 beats\
Misra Jati: Group of 7 beats\
Sankeerna Jati: Group of 9 beats\
\uc0\u8232     Example:\
Teentaal is predominantly Chatusra Jati because its vibhags are grouped as 4 + 4 + 4 + 4.\
Rupak Taal (3+2+2) includes Tisra and Chatusra Jati groupings.\
\uc0\u8232    Purpose:\
Jati helps identify the internal beat grouping of a taal and is essential for understanding layakari and footwork patterns in Kathak.\'a0\uc0\u8232 \u8232 \
\
 Yati\
\
    Definition:\
Yati refers to the arrangement or progression of rhythmic phrases within a composition. It describes how bols or patterns expand, contract, or remain constant.\
\uc0\u8232     Types of Yati:\
Sama Yati: Equal-length phrases throughout\
Gopuccha Yati: Gradual reduction in phrase length (like a cow\'92s tail)\
Mridanga Yati: Expansion followed by contraction\
Srotovaha Yati: Gradual increase in phrase length (like a river flow)\
\
    Example:\
A Kathak composition where footwork phrases go 4 \'96 3 \'96 2 \'96 1 matras demonstrates Gopuccha Yati.\
A composition structured as 2 \'96 3 \'96 4 \'96 5 matras illustrates Srotovaha Yati.\
\uc0\u8232    Purpose:\
Yati enhances the aesthetic and compositional beauty of a rhythmic piece and is often used in advanced compositions like toras, tukras, and tihais.\uc0\u8232 \
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa297\partightenfactor0
\cf2 Bhakti Rasa in Kathak\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf4 Bhakti rasa, the sentiment of devotion, forms the spiritual foundation of Kathak. Rooted in the Vaishnava bhakti tradition, Kathak often portrays divine love and devotion, especially through stories of Lord Krishna and Radha. The dancer expresses surrender, longing, joy, and union with the divine through subtle abhinaya, rhythmic movement, and musical interpretation.\
\
Bhakti rasa in Kathak transcends mere storytelling; it becomes a medium for spiritual experience, connecting the performer and the audience to a deeper sense of devotion and inner reflections.\'a0\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa297\partightenfactor0
\cf2 Kathak Dance Dress, Jewelry, Makeup\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf4 Kathak costume, jewellery, and makeup together enhance the elegance and expressive quality of the dance. Traditionally, dancers wear flowing costumes such as lehenga-choli (specially for performing Hindu bhakti geeti), and also the anarkali or angarkha which accentuate spins and footwork, while light fabrics allow graceful movement. Jewelry is usually delicate yet striking, including necklaces, earrings, bangles, and sometimes a tikka, complementing the classical aesthetic without overpowering the dancer. Makeup in Kathak is subtle and refined, focusing on expressive eyes with defined liner and brows, natural tones for the face, and a bindi to highlight facial expressions. Overall, the attire and adornments support Kathak\'92s emphasis on grace, clarity, and abhinaya rather than heavy ornamentation.\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa297\partightenfactor0
\cf2 Lasya and Tandav in Kathak\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf4 In Kathak, Tandav and Lasya represent two contrasting yet complementary expressive qualities within the dance form. Tandav reflects vigor, strength, and dynamic energy, and is expressed through powerful footwork, brisk chakkars, sharp movements, and complex rhythmic patterns. It often conveys heroic, masculine, or intense emotional states. Lasya, on the other hand, embodies grace, softness, and fluidity, characterized by gentle movements, subtle transitions, delicate abhinaya, and lyrical expressions. Lasya is commonly associated with themes of love, devotion, and beauty. Together, Tandav and Lasya create balance in Kathak, allowing the dancer to seamlessly shift between strength and softness, rhythm and emotion, forming the complete aesthetic of the dance.\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa297\partightenfactor0
\cf2 History of Kathak\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf4 Kathak originated in the temples of North India, where Kathakars (storytellers) narrated and interpreted tales from Hindu mythology. Over time, these narrations naturally incorporated dance and music, as the Kathakars expressed their devotion in states of spiritual ecstasy. Gradually, this practice evolved into a hereditary and codified art form.\
\
During the Bhakti Movement, Kathak centered primarily on devotional themes associated with Lord Krishna, Radha, and the gopis. These narratives, drawn from sacred texts such as the Bhagavata Purana, symbolized divine love. The relationship between Radha and Krishna came to represent the eternal bond between the Atman (individual soul) and the Paramatma (universal soul)\'97a philosophical concept that Kathak artists conveyed through dance ballets and dramatic presentations.\
\
With the advent of the Mughal period, Kathak entered the royal courts, where it was embraced as a form of aristocratic entertainment while continuing to retain its devotional essence in temple traditions. During this era, Kathak absorbed Persian and Central Asian influences, including elements reminiscent of Sufi whirling, changes in costume from traditional saris and ghagras to the angarkha (Anarkali), and the development of rapid, intricate footwork and swift pirouettes. This period marked a significant phase of stylistic expansion and technical refinement.\
\
A pivotal figure in Kathak\'92s evolution was Nawab Wajid Ali Shah of Lucknow, a distinguished patron, poet, and accomplished dancer. He invited renowned Kathak maestros to his court, institutionalizing the art form and contributing to its formalization and stylistic sophistication. Under his patronage, Kathak attained a heightened level of artistic polish and recognition.\
\
The spread of British colonial rule in the 19th century led to a severe decline of Kathak, along with other Indian classical dance forms. Missionaries and colonial officials disparaged the dance, urging performers to abandon indigenous themes in favor of European and Christian narratives. This criticism was further echoed by sections of Indian society influenced by Victorian moral values, who misunderstood Kathak\'92s spiritual foundation and dismissed it as immoral or regressive.\
\
The Indian independence movement witnessed a resurgence of Kathak, driven by a broader cultural revival and a collective effort to reclaim India\'92s artistic heritage. This revival emerged across both Hindu and Muslim gharanas, with the Lucknow and Jaipur traditions playing a crucial role in restoring Kathak\'92s dignity, structure, and prestige.\
\
Although Kathak is widely regarded as an ancient art form, its present-day practice reflects a process of cultural revival and renewal. Kathak stands unique among Indian classical dances for embodying influences from both Hinduism and Islam. In its modern form, across the major gharanas\'97Lucknow, Jaipur, and Banaras\'97a Kathak performance typically comprises three sections: an invocatory piece (Vandana), a pure dance segment featuring abstract rhythmic compositions such as toda, tukra, tarana, and tihai, and an expressive segment (abhinaya) focused on narrative and emotional expression.\
\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa297\partightenfactor0
\cf2 Anga Sanyam Shloka\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf4 Yato Hasta Tato Drishti\
Yato Drishti Tato Manah\
Yato Manah Tato Bhavah\
Yato Bhavah Tato Rasah\
\
Meaning:\
Where the hand goes, the eyes follow.\
Where the eyes go, the mind follows.\
Where the mind goes, emotion arises.\
Where there is emotion, there is aesthetic experience (rasa).\
This shloka explains the fundamental connection between gesture, gaze, mind, emotion, and rasa, forming the philosophical basis of expression (abhinaya) in Kathak and other classical Indian dance forms.\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa297\partightenfactor0
\cf2 Guru Vandana \
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf4 Guru Brahma Guru Vishnu\
Guru Devo Maheshwarah\
Guru Sakshat Param Brahma\
Tasmai Shri Gurave Namah\
\
Meaning:\
The Guru is Brahma, the creator.\
The Guru is Vishnu, the preserver.\
The Guru is Maheshwara (Shiva), the destroyer.\
The Guru is verily the Supreme Absolute.\
Salutations to that revered Guru.\
The shloka emphasizes that the Guru shapes the disciple\'92s life completely, creating knowledge, preserving discipline, and destroying ignorance. In the arts, the Guru is the bridge between tradition and the student, guiding not only technique but character, humility, and spiritual growth.\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa297\partightenfactor0
\cf2 Lord Ganesh Shloka \
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf4 Vakratunda Mahakaya\
Suryakoti Samaprabha\
Nirvighnam Kuru Me Deva\
Sarva-Kaaryeshu Sarvada\
\
Meaning:\
O Lord Ganesha, of curved trunk and massive body,\
Whose splendor is equal to a million suns. Please remove all obstacles from my work and in every endeavor.\
This Vandana is both a devotional prayer and a symbolic invocation of focus and clarity. Lord Ganesha represents wisdom, intellect, and the power to overcome challenges. By chanting this, one aligns with mental clarity, removes internal doubts, and prepares the mind and heart for successful action. It emphasizes starting any task with awareness, devotion, and confidence.\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa297\partightenfactor0
\cf2 Ma Saraswati Shloka \
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf4 Ya Kundendu Tushara Hara Dhavala,\
Ya Shubhra Vastravrita,\
Ya Veena Vara Danda Manditakara,\
Ya Shveta Padmasana,\
Ya Brahmachyuta Shankara Prabhritibhir Devaih Sada Vandita,\
Sa Mam Pattu Saraswati Bhagavati Nihshesha Jadyapaha\
\
Meaning:\
O Goddess Saraswati, who is as fair as the jasmine flower, the moon, and a snow\uc0\u8209 white garland. Who is dressed in pure white and whose hands are adorned with the Veena. Who is seated on a white lotus. Who is ever worshipped by Brahma, Vishnu, and Shiva. May the Goddess protect me and remove all my ignorance.\
\
This Shloka is not just a prayer for external blessings but a call for inner awakening and wisdom. Ma Saraswati symbolizes the clarity of mind, purity of thought, and creative expression. Chanting this Shloka invokes focus, intellect, and the removal of mental dullness, helping the devotee align with higher knowledge and spiritual insight.\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf2 Lord Krishno Vandana\cf4  \
\
Bhaje vrajaika ma\uc0\u7751 danam samasta p\u257 pa kha\u7751 danam,\
Svabhakta chitta ra\'f1janam sadaiv Nanda\uc0\u8209 nandanam.\
Supiccha guchchha mastakam, s\uc0\u363 n\u257 d ve\u7751 u hastakam,\
Ana\uc0\u7749 ga ra\u7749 ga s\u257 garam namaami Krishna n\u257 garam.\
\
This eight\uc0\u8209 verse hymn (Krishn Ashtakam) describes Krishno as the delight of Vraja, remover of sins, beloved of devotees, adorned with peacock feathers, and the one who plays the flute, evoking his joyful and compassionate nature.  \
In essence, chanting or meditating on this shloka is not just praise; it\'92s a practical spiritual tool. It purifies the mind, awakens love for the divine, and guides the devotee toward a state of blissful awareness and surrender.\
\
\cf2 Lord Shiva Vandana\cf4  \
\
Shloka (in English script):\
Angikam bhuvanam yasya\
Vaachikam sarva-vaangmayam\
Aaharyam chandra-taaradi\
Tam vande saattvikam Shivam\
\
Meaning:\
I bow to Lord Shiva, whose body is the entire universe,\
whose speech is all forms of expression,\
whose adornments are the moon and the stars,\
and whose very being is pure sattva (divine essence).\
\
This verse sees Shiva as the cosmic dancer, where every movement of the universe is dance. It reminds dancers that their body is a microcosm of the cosmos, and dance is a sacred act connecting the individual to universal consciousness.\
\cf2 \
Biographies  Of Legends : \
\
Ishwari Prasad Ji :\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf4 Ishwari Prasad, a devotee from Handia (Allahabad), is celebrated as the founder of the Lucknow Gharana of Kathak. Inspired by a dream of Lord Krishna, he devoted his life to reviving Kathak as a form of devotional worship. He trained his three sons\'97Arguji, Kharguji, and Tularamji\'97whose descendants established the Lucknow lineage, blending graceful movements, intricate footwork (chakkars), expressive storytelling (abhinaya), and thumri integration.\
\
The Lucknow Gharana, rooted in Ishwari Prasad\'92s teachings, emphasizes elegance, sophistication, and Bhakti-inspired themes, particularly Krishna-Radha devotion. His family lineage, including notable figures like Prakashji and Thakur Prasad, influenced courtly Kathak under the Nawabs of Lucknow, leaving a lasting legacy on the art form.\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf2 Durga Prasad Ji\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf4 Durga Prasad Ji, son of Ishwari Prasad, was a key torchbearer of the Lucknow Gharana of Kathak. Trained rigorously under his father, he mastered the hallmark features of the Lucknow style\'97graceful movements, intricate footwork (chakkars), and expressive storytelling (abhinaya). He performed extensively in the royal courts of Lucknow, where his artistry was highly praised for its elegance and devotional depth. Beyond performing, Durga Prasad Ji was an influential teacher, mentoring the next generation of Kathak dancers and ensuring that the aesthetic and spiritual essence of the Lucknow Gharana was preserved and passed down with fidelity.\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab20\sl250\slmult1\partightenfactor0

\fs26\fsmilli13090 \cf7 \
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\fs32 \cf2 Thakur Prasad Ji\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf4 Thakur Prasad Ji, grandson of Ishwari Prasad, emerged as one of the most prominent exponents of the Lucknow Gharana in the 19th century. Renowned for his refined movements, delicate footwork, and emotive abhinaya, he played a major role in popularizing Kathak in the courts of Lucknow, particularly under Nawab Wajid Ali Shah. Thakur Prasad Ji not only performed but also composed and choreographed pieces that integrated Bhakti themes and thumris, enriching the repertoire of the Lucknow style. His dedication to teaching ensured that the lineage remained vibrant, producing a generation of dancers who carried forward the elegance and sophistication of the Lucknow Gharana.\
\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf2 Bindadin Maharaj Ji\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf4 Bindadin Maharaj (1876\'961946) was one of the most celebrated exponents of the Lucknow Gharana of Kathak, renowned for his mastery of rhythm, expression (abhinaya), and emotive storytelling. Born in the family of Kalka Prasad Maharaj, he was deeply rooted in the classical traditions of Kathak and trained under eminent gurus of the Lucknow style.\
\
Bindadin Maharaj is credited with elevating Kathak from a courtly dance form to a highly respected classical art, blending technical virtuosity with devotional expression. He was particularly known for his abhinaya, bringing characters and stories\'97especially from Krishna-Radha lore\'97to life with subtle gestures and emotive nuance. His performances often showcased a delicate balance between intricate footwork (tatkar) and lyrical storytelling, a hallmark of the Lucknow Gharana.\
\
Apart from performing, Bindadin Maharaj was a dedicated teacher, training several generations of dancers and preserving the lineage of the Lucknow style. He also contributed to Kathak\'92s documentation and theory, ensuring that the art could be studied systematically. Today, he is remembered as a transformative figure whose artistry and pedagogy shaped the Lucknow Gharana into a symbol of grace, expression, and musicality in Indian classical dance.\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf2 Kalka Prasad Maharaj Ji\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf4 Kalka Prasad (1842\'961913) was a seminal figure of the Lucknow Gharana of Kathak, renowned for his technical brilliance, graceful movements, and devotion to the classical purity of the art form. Born into a family with a strong Kathak tradition, he was trained rigorously in the Lucknow style, mastering intricate footwork (tatkar), rapid spins (chakkars), and expressive storytelling (abhinaya).\
\
Kalka Prasad Maharaj served in the royal courts of Lucknow, where his performances were admired for their elegance, rhythmic sophistication, and lyrical expressiveness. He also played a crucial role in teaching and mentoring the next generation, including his sons\'97Achchan Maharaj, Shambhu Maharaj and Lachchu Maharaj\'97who would go on to become leading exponents of Kathak.\
\
He is credited with systematizing the repertoire of the Lucknow Gharana (Or Kalka-Bindadin Gharana), integrating thumris and devotional themes, particularly those inspired by Krishna-Radha stories, into performance. His pedagogy and performances significantly influenced the Lucknow style\'92s evolution, ensuring its survival and refinement during a period of social and political change in India. Today, Kalka Prasad Maharaj is remembered as both a brilliant performer and a foundational guru whose legacy continues through his descendants and disciples.\
\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf2 Achchan Maharaj Ji\cf4  \
Achchan Maharaj (1880\'961947) was a legendary Kathak dancer and a leading exponent of the Lucknow Gharana. Born in the family of Kalka Prasad Maharaj, he inherited the tradition of intricate footwork (tatkar), graceful spins (chakkars), and expressive storytelling (abhinaya). Known for his mastery of rhythm and emotive presentation, he performed widely in royal courts and later taught several generations of dancers, including his son, the renowned Birju Maharaj. Achchan Maharaj\'92s dedication to teaching and performance helped preserve and enrich the Lucknow style, making him one of Kathak\'92s most influential figures.\
\
\cf2 Shambhu Maharaj Ji\cf4  \
Shambhu Maharaj (1910\'961970) was one of the most celebrated Kathak maestros of the Lucknow Gharana and a key figure in bringing the art form to modern audiences. Born into the illustrious family of Achchan Maharaj, he inherited the rich legacy of intricate footwork (tatkar), graceful spins (chakkars), and expressive storytelling (abhinaya).\
\
Shambhu Maharaj was renowned for his sensitive and emotive abhinaya, particularly in Krishna-Radha themed performances, as well as his technical mastery in rhythm and complex compositions. He performed widely across India and trained a generation of Kathak dancers, including many who went on to become leading exponents of the art. His teaching at institutions like the Bharatiya Kala Kendra in Delhi helped codify the Lucknow style for future generations, ensuring its continued prominence. Today, Shambhu Maharaj is remembered as both a brilliant performer and a transformative guru whose artistry shaped modern Kathak while preserving its classical elegance.\
\
\cf2 Lachchu Maharaj Ji\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf4 Lachchu Maharaj (1901\'961978) was a legendary Kathak dancer and choreographer of the Lucknow Gharana, known for his expressive abhinaya and mastery over intricate footwork (tatkar). Born into the family of Achchan Maharaj, he inherited the rich tradition of the Lucknow style and became famous for his performances that combined technical brilliance with deep emotive storytelling, particularly in Krishna-Radha themed pieces.\
\
Lachchu Maharaj was not only a performer but also a pioneering choreographer, bringing Kathak to films and large-stage productions, thereby popularizing the art beyond traditional courtly settings. He taught and mentored many prominent dancers, helping preserve and evolve the Lucknow Gharana\'92s stylistic nuances. Revered for his elegance, rhythmic precision, and emotive expression, Lachchu Maharaj left an enduring legacy, ensuring that the artistry and devotional essence of Kathak continued to flourish in modern times.\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf2 Pandit Birju Maharaj Ji\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf4 Pandit Birju Maharaj (1938\'962022) was one of the most iconic Kathak dancers and choreographers of the Lucknow Gharana, widely regarded as a living legend of Indian classical dance. Born into the illustrious family of Achchan Maharaj, he inherited the rich legacy of intricate footwork (tatkar), graceful spins (chakkars), and expressive storytelling (abhinaya). From a young age, he trained under his father and uncles, mastering both the technical and emotive aspects of Kathak.\
\
Birju Maharaj was celebrated for his electrifying performances, innovative choreography, and his ability to blend rhythm, melody, and emotion seamlessly. He popularized Kathak globally, performing on international stages, and also brought the art form into films and large productions, creating a broader audience for classical dance. As a guru, he trained generations of dancers, ensuring the continuation and evolution of the Lucknow Gharana. Revered for his creativity, depth, and devotion, Pandit Birju Maharaj\'92s contribution to Kathak made him a cultural icon, and his legacy continues to inspire dancers worldwide.\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf2 The Nine Rasas (Navarasa)\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf4 \
In Kathak, Navarasa refers to the nine primary emotions that a performer expresses through facial expressions (abhinaya), gestures, and body language to convey stories and evoke specific feelings in the audience. Rooted in classical Indian aesthetics, Navarasa is central to the storytelling aspect of Kathak, especially in performances depicting mythological or devotional themes.\
\
\
	Shringara (Love/Attraction) \'96 Romantic or devotional love, often shown in Krishna-Radha pieces.\
Example: Krishna playing the flute and Radha responding with devotion.\
\
	Hasya (Laughter/Comedy) \'96 Joy, humor, or amusement.\
Example: A playful scene of a mischievous Krishna teasing gopis.\
\
	Karuna (Compassion/Sorrow) \'96 Pathos or sadness.\
Example: Sita expressing grief in the Ramayana during her separation from Rama.\
\
	Raudra (Anger) \'96 Fury or wrath.\
Example: Arjuna\'92s battle rage in Mahabharata depictions.\
\
	Veer (Heroism/Courage) \'96 Valor and bravery.\
Example: Bhima fighting demons with determination.\
\
	Bhayanaka (Fear/Terror) \'96 Anxiety or dread.\
Example: Villagers showing fear during the Govardhan Leela, as Krishna lifts the Govardhan hill to protect them from the raging storm sent by Indra.\
\
	Bibhatsa (Disgust/Aversion) \'96 Repulsion or dislike.\
Example: A demon\'92s grotesque actions in mythological stories.\
\
	Adbhuta (Wonder/Amazement) \'96 Awe or surprise.\
Example: A gopi marveling at Krishna\'92s divine miracles.\
\
	Shanta (Peace/Serenity) \'96 Tranquility or calmness.\
Example: Meditative devotion of a yogi or Krishna in serene moments.\
\
In Kathak, a performer may blend these emotions seamlessly during a single piece, using subtle expressions, hand gestures (mudras), and rhythmic movements to convey the story vividly.\
\
\
\
\
}